---
notion_id: 2ae11a71-fda7-808b-8495-c4898154819c
created: 2025-11-17
---
**Evolution of the automobile **(*Adapted from* https://www.thoughtco.com/who-invented-the-car-4059932)
The first self-powered road vehicles were powered by steam engines, and it was Nicolas Joseph Cugnot of France who built the first automobile in 1769. Yet either Gottlieb Daimler or Karl Benz are more widely credited, as they both invented highly successful and practical gasoline-powered vehicles that brought in the age of modern automobiles. Daimler and Benz invented cars that looked and worked like the cars of today.
An internal combustion engine is one that uses the explosive combustion of fuel to push a piston within a cylinder — the piston's movement turns a crankshaft that then turns the car wheels via a chain or a drive shaft. The different types of fuel commonly used for car combustion engines are gasoline (or petrol), diesel, and kerosene.
A brief outline of the history of the internal combustion engine includes the following highlights:
**1680 **- Dutch physicist, Christian Huygens designed (but never built) an internal combustion engine that was to be fueled with gunpowder.
**1807 **- Francois Isaac de Rivaz of Switzerland invented an internal combustion engine that used a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen for fuel. Rivaz designed a car for his engine — the first internal combustion powered automobile. However, his was a very unsuccessful design.
**1824 **- English engineer, Samuel Brown adapted an old steam engine to burn gas, and he used it to briefly power a vehicle up a hill in London.
**1858 **- Belgian-born engineer, Jean Joseph Étienne Lenoir, invented and patented (1860) a double-acting, electric spark-ignition internal combustion engine powered by coal gas. In 1863, Lenoir attached an improved engine (using petroleum and a primitive carburetor) to a three-wheeled wagon that managed to complete a historic fifty-mile (80.4673 kilometer) road trip.
**1862 **- French civil engineer Alphonse Beau de Rochas patented but did not build a four-stroke engine.
**1864 **- Austrian engineer, Siegfried Marcus, built a one-cylinder engine with a basic carburetor and attached his engine to a cart for a rocky 500-foot (152.4 meter) drive. Several years later, Marcus designed a vehicle that briefly ran at 10 mph (16.09344 kmh), which a few historians believe may have been the first modern automobile as it was gasoline powered.
**1873 **- George Brayton, an American engineer, developed an unsuccessful two-stroke kerosene engine using two external pumping cylinders. However, it was considered the first safe and practical oil engine.
**1866 **- German engineers, Eugen Langen, and Nicolaus August Otto improved on Lenoir's and de Rochas' designs and invented a more efficient gas engine.
**1876 **- Nicolaus August Otto invented and later patented a successful four-stroke engine, known as the "Otto cycle".
**1876 **- The first successful two-stroke engine was invented by Sir Dougald Clerk.
**1883 - **French engineer, Edouard Delamare-Debouteville, built a single-cylinder four-stroke engine that ran on stove gas. While it is not certain if he did indeed build a car, Delamare-Debouteville's designs were very advanced for the time — ahead of both Daimler and Benz in some ways at least on paper.
**1885 **- Gottlieb Daimler invented what is often seen as the prototype of the modern gas engine — with a vertical cylinder and gasoline injected through a carburetor (patented in 1887). Daimler first built a two-wheeled vehicle, the "Reitwagen" (Riding Carriage) with this engine, and a year later built the world's first four-wheeled motor vehicle.
**1886 **- On January 29, Karl Benz received the first patent for a gas-fueled car.
**1889 **- Daimler built an improved four-stroke engine with mushroom-shaped valves and two V-slant cylinders.
**1890 **- Wilhelm Maybach built the first four-cylinder, four-stroke engine.
Engine design and car design were integrated activities, and almost all of the engine designers mentioned above also designed cars, with a few going on to become major manufacturers of automobiles. All of these inventors and more made notable improvements in the evolution of internal combustion vehicles.
**Notes **–** ***as you read along, take notes in your own words to remember what you read.*
**Vocabulary** – *note down any new vocabulary for you to remember and use.*
**Your name: **                                                              **Date:**
**Questions on evolution of automobiles ***– please answer in your own words. You can input directly here on this form or on a separate Word document. (If you do, please *only* use Word –*
no other* file format.)*
1. Who built the first automobile powered by a steam engine, and when?
1. What can Gottlieb Daimler and Karl Benz be credited with?
1. In the timeline, what were the other kinds of fuel that were tried in early automobiles?
1. Which engineer designed what historians regard as the first true gasoline-powered vehicle?
1. How would the parts of the first safe and practical oil engine be described as?
**Reflection question(s) & writing *****–**** Choose 1-2 of these questions. Write a 1-2 paragraph reflection in your own words on 1-2 of the questions you choose.*
What might have been some of the biggest challenges with early efforts in combustion engines?
How safe do you think some of these early combustion vehicles would have been?
Why do you think there was a greater push for combustion engines than what there were with electric engines, even when electric engines were found to be possible?
Do you believe that the 20th century might have been different had electric engines been developed rather than combustion engines using gasoline?